# Gambiae_SaltWaterTol
This is a collection of scripts for a range of genomic data processing and analysis.
Below are notes about some useful tools. 
Not everything is documented yet, but most scripts have some helpful information if you type `python script.py -h`.

## Contents

* [Finding CRISPR target sites](#Finding-CRISPR-target-sites)
* [Filtering CRISPR target sites](#Filtering-CRISPR-target-sites)
* [Filtering non-coding loci](#Filtering-non-coding-loci)
* [Excluding species from sequence alignments](#Excluding-species-from-sequence-alignments)
* [Filtering sequence alignments](#Filtering-sequence-alignments)
* [Adapting BPP control files](#Adapting-BPP-control-files)
* [Extracting best trees](#Extracting-best-trees)
* [Cropping FASTA alignments](#Cropping-FASTA-alignments)
* [Scanning nonsynonymous-synonymous mutations](#Scanning-nonsynonymous-synonymous-mutations)
* [Extracting unique ortholog IDs](#Extracting-unique-ortholog-IDs)
* [Summarizing divergence times](#Summarizing-divergence-times)
* [Plotting population genomic statistics](#Plotting-population-genomic-statistics)

___
## Finding CRISPR target sites
The script `CRISPRs.py` checks the occurrence of overlapping forward and reverse CRISPR target sites from a reference genome in [FASTA](https://www.bioinformatics.nl/tools/crab_fasta.html) format. This script is based on the most commonly used Cas9 from *Streptococcus pyogenes*, which recognizes the protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) sequence 5′-NGG-3′ (where “N” can be any nucleotide base). For each forward CRISPR target site, `CRISPRs.py` exports its coordinates (chromosome, start, and end), sequence (e.g. ATGCGCCACACTTGACACTGG), and strand (for). For each reverse CRISPR target site, `CRISPRs.py` exports its coordinates (chromosome, start, and end), reverse complement sequence (e.g. from CCAGTGTCAAGTGTGGCGCAT to ATGCGCCACACTTGACACTGG), and strand (rev).

#### Example command
`python CRISPRs.py --size 18 --ref file.fasta`

`python CRISPRs.py -h` Will print a full list of command arguments.

#### Command arguments
| Name | Description |
| :--: | ----------- | 
| `size` | Size of the CRISPR target site without the PAM sequence (default is 18) |
| `ref`  | Reference genome in FASTA format |

#### Notes
The script `CRISPRs.py` will not check the occurrence of CRISPR target sites within soft-masked regions of the reference genome (i.e. in lower-case, e.g. repetitive elements and low-complexity sequences).
To run it, ensure that you are using Python v.2.7, and have installed the following dependencies: os, Bio, re, and argparse.

___
## Filtering CRISPR target sites
To compare the list of CRISPR target sites found in different species, and thus to determine the CRISPR target sites that are specific to one species (i.e. present in a species but absent in another), it is required to convert their coordinates (i.e. chromosome, start, and end) to a common coordinate system (e.g. AgamP4 PEST for the *Anopheles gambiae* complex). The convertion of CRISPR target site coordinates from one genome to another can be generated using genome alignments in the Multiple Alignment Files (MAF) format, and the [LiftOver](https://jydu.github.io/maffilter/maffilter.html#LiftOver) function of [MafFilter](https://bmcgenomics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2164-15-53). However, the convertion table (`.tln`) generated by [MafFilter](https://bmcgenomics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2164-15-53) only contains the original and converted coordinates (i.e. will not contain the sequences and strands), including some coordinates that can not be converted (i.e. NA) because not aligned in the MAF alignment. The script `Tln2Bed.py` excludes the CRISPR target sites with missing converted coordinates (i.e. NA), and links the converted coordinates of the CRISPR targets sites with their corresponding sequences (e.g. ATGCGCCACACTTGACACTGG), and strands (i.e. `for` or `rev`). The results will be stored into one [BED](https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format1) file, which can then be used in [BEDtools](https://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) to intersect the list of converted CRISPR target sites with a general feature format (GFF) file describing the genes and other features of the genome.

#### Example command
`python Tln2Bed.py --tln file.tln --crispr file_CRISPRs.out`

`python Tln2Bed.py -h` Will print a full list of command arguments.

#### Command arguments
| Name | Description |
| :--: | ----------- | 
| `tln`    | TLN table generated with the liftover() function of MafFilter |
| `crispr` | List of CRISPR target sites generated with the CRISPRs.py script |

#### Notes
The script `Tln2Bed.py` takes into account that the coordinates are zero-based in the convertion table (i.e. start at 0), and are one-based (i.e. start at 1) in the list of CRISPR target sites. The coordinates in the output (BED) file are one-based (i.e. same as [Samtools faidx](http://www.htslib.org/doc/samtools-faidx.html), the GFF annotation file, and the FASTA file).
To run it, ensure that you are using Python v.2.7, and have installed the following dependencies: tempfile, and argparse.

___
## Filtering non-coding loci
To infer the species tree of the *Anopheles gambiae* complex [Thawornwattana et al. (2018)](https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/35/10/2512/5068377) extracted coding and non-coding short segments (called loci) from the genomes of six members of the *Anopheles gambiae* complex and used the program [BPP](https://academic.oup.com/cz/article/61/5/854/1821090). BPP implements a Bayesian method under the multispecies coalescent (MSC) model which takes into account genealogical heterogeneity across the genome and uncertainty in the gene trees. Following the procedure of Thawornwattana et al. (2018), the script `NonCodingLoci.py` filters and extracts the coordinates of the non-coding loci containing between 100 and 1,000 sites, and that are at least 2 kb apart from consecutive loci. The coordinates of the filtered non-coding loci will be stored into one [BED](https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format1) file and one [BEDGRAPH](https://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/help/bedgraph.html) file, which can then be used in [MafFilter](https://bmcgenomics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2164-15-53) to extract the non-coding regions of an alignment. 

#### Example command
`python NonCodLoc.py --bed 2L.bed --chromosome 2L --size 49364325 --distance 2000 --minimum 100 --maximum 1000`

`python NonCodLoc.py -h` Will print a full list of command arguments.

#### Command arguments
| Name | Description |
| :--: | ----------- | 
| `bed`        | Bed file describing the coordinates of the loci |
| `chromosome` | Name of the chromosome/scaffold |
| `size`       | Size (bp) of the chromosome/scaffold |
| `distance`   | Minimum distance (bp) between consecutive loci (default is 2000) |
| `minimum`    | Minimum number of sites (bp) per loci (default is 100) |
| `maximum`    | Maximum number of sites (bp) per loci (default is 1000) |

#### Notes
The script `NonCodLoc.py` takes a [BED](https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format1) file describing the coordinates of each non-coding locus which can be generated using [BEDtools](https://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and a general feature format (GFF) file describing the genes and other features of the genome. While the default parameters of the script `NonCodLoc.py` follow the exact procedure of [Thawornwattana et al. (2018)](https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/35/10/2512/5068377), different parameters can be tested (i.e. the minmum distance between consecutive loci, and the minimum and maximum of sites per loci).
To run it, ensure that you are using Python v.2.7, and have installed the following dependencies: argparse.

___
## Excluding species from sequence alignments
[BPP](https://academic.oup.com/cz/article/61/5/854/1821090) takes a  sequence  alignment file that contains the sequence data for all short segments (called loci). These sequence alignments for multiple loci are in the [PHYLIP](http://rosalind.info/glossary/phylip-format/) format (.phy), with one alignment following the other, all in one file. The script `ExclSpecPhyl.py` excludes one species from sequence alignments in PHYLIP format.

#### Example command
`python ExclSpecPhyl.py --species spA`

`python ExclSpecPhyl.py -h` Will print a full list of command arguments.

#### Command arguments
| Name | Description |
| :--: | ----------- | 
| `species` | Species to exclude from the multiple sequence alignments |

#### Notes
The script `ExclSpecPhyl.py` needs to be run from the directory containing the sequence alignments to filter.
To run it, ensure that you are using Python v.2.7, and have installed the following dependencies: glob, and argparse.

___
## Filtering sequence alignments
The script `FltProGapMis.py` filters each sequence alignment in [PHYLIP](http://rosalind.info/glossary/phylip-format/) format (`.phy`) that has fewer than a maximum proportion of gap and missing nucleotides (e.g. 50%), and having a minimum length (e.g. 51 nucleotides). This script will move each sequence alignment that passed the filter to the `1_Keep` directory, and move each sequence alignment that did not pass the filter to the `2_Remove` directory.

#### Example command
`python FltProGapMis.py --prop 0.5 --length 51`

`python FltProGapMis.py -h` Will print a full list of command arguments.

#### Command arguments
| Name | Description |
| :--: | ----------- | 
| `prop`   | Maximum proportion of gap and missing nucleotides in the alignment |
| `length` | Minimum length (without gap and missing nucleotides) |

#### Notes
The script `FltProGapMis.py` needs to be run from the directory containing the sequence alignments to filter.
To run it, ensure that you are using Python v.2.7, and have installed the following dependencies: os, glob, shutil, and argparse.

___
## Adapting BPP control files
For computational tractability of [BPP](https://academic.oup.com/cz/article/61/5/854/1821090) and to explore the heterogeneity in species relationships across the genome, [Thawornwattana et al. (2018)](https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/35/10/2512/5068377) split each data set into blocks of 100 short segments (called loci). While the script [`clustPhy.py`](https://github.com/stsmall/An_funestus/blob/master/clustPhy.py) clusters the loci in blocks (e.g. 100), the script [`makeCTL4BPP.py`](https://github.com/stsmall/An_funestus/blob/master/makeCTL4BPP.py) makes a control file for each block (e.g. A01.bpp.ctl), which defines the type and parameters of the analysis to be run in BPP. However, as the last block generated with the script `clustPhy.py` usually contains less loci than the required number, the number of loci listed in the control file and the number of loci in the block do not match. Therefore, for each sequence alignment file, the script `NbLociCtl.py` counts the number of loci per block, and changes the number of listed loci in the corresponding control file if necessary. 

#### Example command
`python NbLociCtl.py --block 100 --species 7`

`python NbLociCtl.py -h` Will print a full list of command arguments.

#### Command arguments
| Name | Description |
| :--: | ----------- | 
| `block`   | Number of loci per block |
| `species` | Number species per loci |

#### Notes
The script `NbLociCtl.py` needs to be run from the directory containing the control and sequence alignment files required by the A01 analysis of BPP. The blocks having less than the required number of loci can be run in BPP using the modified control file, or can be excluded from the BPP analysis.
To run it, ensure that you are using Python v.2.7, and have installed the following dependencies: glob, and argparse.

___
## Extracting best trees
The script `ExtrBestTree.py` extracts the best trees and their coordinates from the results generated by the A01 analysis of [BPP](https://academic.oup.com/cz/article/61/5/854/1821090) (.out). While the best trees will be stored into one output file called `bestrees.out`, their coordinates will be stored in another output file called `bestrees_coord.out`. The list of trees can then be used to build a consensus phylogenetic tree (e.g. using [ASTRAL-III](https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12859-018-2129-y)).

#### Example command
`python ExtrBestTree.py`

#### Notes
The script `ExtrBestTree.py` needs to be run from the directory containing the results generated by the A01 analysis of BPP. The coordinates (i.e. start and stop) of each genomic region used to infer the phylogenetic trees with BPP should be indicated in the name of the corresponding result files (e.g. `bpp_12345-67890.out`).
To run it, ensure that you are using Python v.2.7, and have installed the following dependencies: re, and glob.

___
## Cropping FASTA alignments
While [FASTA](https://www.bioinformatics.nl/tools/crab_fasta.html) alignments of big portion of a genome (e.g. full gene) have many purposes, some comparative genomic analysis required to crop these alignment into smaller ones (e.g. one exon or one CDS). The script `FastaCrop.py` crops nucleotide sequence alignments in FASTA format (`.fa`) according to specific coordinates described in a [BED](https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format1) file.

#### Example command
`python FastaCrop.py`

#### Notes
The script `FastaCrop.py` needs to be run from the directory containing the FASTA alignment(s) and the BED file(s). Both file names need to indicate the coordinates of the FASTA alignment to crop (i.e. `chrom_start_stop`, e.g. `chr2_100_200.fa` and `chr2_100_200.bed`). The BED file describing the coordinates can be generated using [BEDtools](https://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and a general feature format (GFF) file describing the genes, exons, and other features of the genome.
To run it, ensure that you are using Python v.2.7, and have installed the following dependencies: re, os, Bio, glob, and shutil.

___
## Scanning nonsynonymous-synonymous mutations
The script `MutScan.py` scans coding nucleotide sequence alignments (in [FASTA](https://www.bioinformatics.nl/tools/crab_fasta.html) format; `.fa`), compares the nucleotide and amino-acid sequences between two aligned sets of sequences, and identifies the nonsynonymous and synonymous mutations. The script also checks the open reading frame (ORF), and translates the nucleotide sequences into amino-acid sequences. For each alignment, the nonsynonymous and synonymous mutations will be stored in a file (`file_MutScan.out`), and the nucleotide and amino-acid sequences will be exported into new FASTA files (`file_ORF.fa` and `file_ORF_AA.fa`, respectively).

#### Example command
`python MutScan.py --set1 sequence1 sequence2 sequence3 --set2 sequence4 sequence5 --orientation forward`

`python MutScan.py -h` Will print a full list of command arguments.

#### Command arguments
| Name | Description |
| :--: | ----------- | 
| `set1`        | List of sequences from the first set |
| `set2`        | List of sequences from the second set |
| `orientation` | Orientation of the sequences to be compared (forward or reverse) |

#### Notes
The script `MutScan.py` needs to be run from the directory containing the alignment(s). The name(s) of the FASTA file(s) need to indicate the coordinates of the alignment(s) (i.e. `chrom_start_stop.fa`, e.g. `chr2_100_200.fa`). Expected warning message: "BiopythonWarning: Partial codon, len(sequence) not a multiple of three. Explicitly trim the sequence or add trailing N before translation. This may become an error in future."
To run it, ensure that you are using Python v.2.7, and have installed the following dependencies: Bio, glob, and argparse.

___
## Extracting unique ortholog IDs
Understanding the biological meaning behind large lists of genes have many purposes. In order to gain insight into the potential functional role of a list of *Anopheles gambiae* candidate genes, the list of their *Drosophila melanogaster* orthologs can be retrieved using [BioMart](https://bmcgenomics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2164-10-22) as available at [VectorBase](https://biomart.vectorbase.org/biomart/martview/abe9742c0c6ad789305c2f72967d9fb7), which can then be tested for functional enrichment (e.g. using [DAVID](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/gb-2003-4-9-r60)). However, for each *An. gambiae* candidate gene, BioMart will export all known *D. melanogaster* orthologs, which could lead to an over-representation of some functional roles. To avoid this issue, it is important to only keep one ortholog per candidate gene while picking different orthologs when candidate genes share several orthologs. The script `BioMartOrtho.py` extracts unique ortholog IDs from the output of BioMart as available on VectorBase. The list of unique ortholog IDs can then be used to identify enriched biological themes, particularly gene ontology (GO) terms (e.g. using DAVID). The list of of *D. melanogaster* ortholog IDs will be stored into one output file with the suffix `_BioMartOrtho.out`.

#### Example command
`python BioMartOrtho.py --ortho BioMart_Orthologs.xls`

`python BioMartOrtho.py -h` Will print a full list of command arguments.

#### Command arguments
| Name | Description |
| :--: | ----------- | 
| `ortho` | Excel file describing the Drosophila melanogaster orthologues (generated with BioMart) |

#### Notes
To retrieve the *D. melanogaster* orthologs of the gene list, follow the instructions below: (1) Open [BioMart](https://bmcgenomics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2164-10-22) available on [VectorBase](https://biomart.vectorbase.org/biomart/martview/abe9742c0c6ad789305c2f72967d9fb7); (2) choose the first dataset: VectorBase genes; (3) choose the second dataset: Anopheles gambiae genes (AgamP4.12); (4) open the "Gene" tab from the "Filters" navigation bar, and import the gene list as the "Input external references ID list"; (5) select the "homologues" option in the "Attributes" navigation bar; (6) open the "GENE" tab from the "Attributes" navigation bar, and pick the information to be included in the output (e.g. Gene stable ID, chromosome name, start, stop...); open the "ORTHOLOGUES" tab from the "Attributes" navigation bar, select "Drosophila melanogaster Orthologues", and pick the information to be included in the output (e.g. Gene stable ID, chromosome name, start, stop...); (7) click on "Results" from the menu bar to preview the results of the query; (8) export the unique results in Excel format by selecting the corresponding parameter.
To run it, ensure that you are using Python v.2.7, and have installed the following dependencies: os, panda, and argparse.

___
## Summarizing divergence times
The A00 analysis of [BPP](https://academic.oup.com/cz/article/61/5/854/1821090) is used to generate the posterior distribution of parameters on the maximum a posteriori tree. The results generated by this analysis (i.e. `*.msmc.txt`) can be summarized into [R](https://www.r-project.org/) however you like, but I have written some functions to make these tasks easier. These functions are provided in the script `DivergenceTimes.R`. The [R Markdown notebook](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/articles_intro.html) `DivergenceTimes.Rmd` provides a tutorial containing all text, code, and results.

___
## Plotting population genomic statistics
The script [popgenWindows.py](https://github.com/simonhmartin/genomics_general) computes some standard population genomic statistics in sliding windows: pi, *FST* and *DXY*. The results generated by this script can be read, manipulated and plotted into [R](https://www.r-project.org/) however you like, but I have written some functions to make these tasks easier. These functions are provided in the script `PlotpopgenWindows.R`. The [R Markdown notebook](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/articles_intro.html) `PlotpopgenWindows.Rmd` provides a tutorial containing all text, code, and results.
